The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today. Presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
This edition of the Science Fiction Radio Show will be an interview with author
Joe Haldeman. Joe Haldeman began publishing science fiction in the early 1970s
and has already gained the highest acclaim the field offers to its authors. His
first novel, The Forever War, which came out in 1975, won both the Hugo and
Nebula Awards for that year. Since then, he's published two novels, Mindbridge
and All My Sins Remembered, and a collection of short stories. Haldeman is noted
for the strong scientific backgrounds in his work, but also for his sensitive
treatment of human character.
Your writing started out as a hobby that developed into a profession, didn't it?
Well, yeah, although the development was fairly rampant, I always wrote, ever
since I was in second or third grade, I wrote a lot of poetry. And, well, when I
was a senior in college, my last semester, I took a creative writing course. So
I was in physics and astronomy, but I wanted to take something easy to fill out
my 18 hours or so. And I wrote two science fiction stories. And eventually I
sold both of them. I was drafted, and then when I came back from Vietnam, they
give you 30 days leave, and I just retyped the stories then and sent them out.
And one of them sold before I was out of the Army. And I don't know, I just, I
never thought you could make very much money at it, but I saw it as sort of a
source of beer money. And when I decided to drop out of graduate school and try
a semester of writing full-time, I sold my first novel about a couple of days
after I dropped out, so I never went back. That would tend to kind of cement
things. Yeah. Yeah, it's funny. Coincidence has a lot to do with it. There's an
awful lot of luck in not getting started writing. Yeah. Your first works had to
do with war. You were in Vietnam, and that must have had a significant impact on
you. Oh, yeah. Well, of course, it's the most dramatic thing that's ever
happened to me, so it's the most obvious fuel for my fiction. Although I don't
want to be typed as a writer about war, I have written two novels and edited one
anthology about it. The old adage to write what you know, and of the things I
know, that's one that's most universally interesting. In Infinite Dreams, which
is a collection of stories you published in various publications since about
1972, War and violence linked with a change in mankind's behavior seem to be
recurrent themes in some of these stories. Are you saying that sometimes man has
to face violent conflicts in order to change his behavior? Well, I don't think
I'm coming out and saying it that directly. I think it's obvious that
confronting death on a daily basis changes people, and sometimes radically for
the worse, than the people who are totally dehumanized by war. But speaking
racially, I don't think you could make such a broad statement. What's behind
some of the things I'm writing is the hope that human nature eventually may
improve to the point where we won't have wars. We find other ways to settle our
differences. Well, actually, being in the Army was had an important effect on my
writing, aside from war, because I met a whole new class of people. That is, all
of my friends while I was growing up tended to be white, middle-class, upper
-middle-class kids, and their successors, white, middle-class, upper-class
scientists, and so forth. And it was just a mundane revelation to find that
people who came from different backgrounds still had an awful lot in common with
me. Because most of the guys in my combat outfit were urban, black, high school,
junior high school dropouts. Yeah. got along quite well. In both your novels,
Mindbridge and Forever War, you have mankind united in the face of a crisis
with an alien race. Do you think that we'll ever be able to progress without
this sort of conflict spurring it on? I wonder whether... Well, of course, it's
a simplification, and it's an old theme in science fiction. That is, everybody
getting together because the Martians are after us. I wish I could say that I
thought that we would be able to do this in the face of a less dramatic uniform
enemy that is obviously the threats, combined threats of overpopulation and
dwindling resources and industrial pollution are as threatening as either of the
enemies in those two novels. But we can't make a coherent face against this
enemy and fight it. It's just a... It's a way of making specific sort of a real
but diffuse nightmare. And some of your stories that do deal with war and
conflict on a personal level where, like in... There's a story where a man is
hit by a laser mine and his leg is cut off and he's hurt personally. Does that
relate to something in your own experiences? Well, yeah. I was wounded pretty
severely in Vietnam. I was hospitalized for six months. And it was a booby trap.
I didn't set it off. Somebody else did. But it was a pretty big one. I had over
200 separate wounds. But managed to come out of it all right after a few months
of physical therapy. So it's... Yeah, I draw on that experience. The one you're
talking about is a mind of his own. But I think I've got other short stories
like The Private War of Private Jacob that draw on that memory. Are you
exercising some demons? I don't... I don't know whether I am or not. I think I'm
just using available material. If the... I don't think the demon is too easily
exercised by fiction. That's a truism that I don't think is always true. In your
first novel, Forever War, it's a novel that deals with war on intergalactic or
intergalactic level. Is it... It's similar in some respects to Heinlein's
Starship Troopers. Did you intentionally write it as sort of an answer to that
or has it just come about that the work ended up that way? Well, there was no
rough intention on my part. In fact, I didn't realize until I was about 70 or 80
pages into the book that many of the details were similar to Starship Troopers.
Somebody else pointed that out when he read the manuscript. I wasn't doing an
answer to Heinlein's book. I thought Heinlein's book was admirable in many ways,
even though we have diametrically opposed philosophies. but the... No, it was...
If it bears any relation to any book, it is to my own first novel, War Year,
because it's an expansion into a science fiction universe of the notions that I
was trying to express in a mainstream novel.
Also, in Forever War, you deal with time compression on the starships. They
travel off to battle at speeds near to that of light, and then when they return,
hundreds of years have passed on the Earth. That's hard science. Yeah. Many
writers are considered hard science or soft science, and some mix the two styles
together. What part does hard science play in your writing? Well, I try to use
it to make the worlds that are in the event more believable, at least to me,
since I do have a background in science and engineering. I think, well, the
writer has to at least suspend his own disbelief while he's making up these
stories, and it's easier for me to do it if it's on a fairly solid scientific
foundation. Even though my science is rather old-fashioned and probably rather
sloppy by a real scientist's standards, it's still enough to convince me, so
it's fulfilled its function. For instance, it goes deeper than just description,
the time dilation in the forever war. Though it's scientifically accurate, its
main function is metaphorical, and that is to demonstrate how the soldiers who
fight a war become isolated from the culture that they're supposed to be
protecting, using a science-fictional device to exaggerate something that
happens to every soldier. Yeah, and then that, when these soldiers leave and
come back, the world they left isn't even the same world once they get back to
it. Which is quite true. I remember when I came back from Vietnam, I was
suddenly plunged into what was an alien culture, even though I'd only been a
soldier for two years. A lot of things had changed. You know, it's not a great
thing to come back. There were no victory parades and that sort of thing.
Yeah. The conflicts aside, Forever War and Mindbridge have optimistic endings,
but in your novel, All My Sins Remembered, was that put together from a series
of short stories? About half of it appeared as two novelettes, you know. Yeah.
But in the end of it, the protagonist is just literally turned off and killed at
the end of it. It's a rather pessimistic ending. Well, it was planned all along
that way. The story is about a bureaucracy that totally takes over a man's
identity and he doesn't really exist except as a tool for that bureaucracy. When
he becomes an inefficient tool, he's scrapped. Yeah, he's programmed to go out
and do certain, I guess what you'd call covert operations? Yeah. And he does
them more or less against his will. That is to say, through very advanced
techniques of conditioning, he's turned into a thoroughly different person. He
was a Buddhist, a pacifist when he started out. He did not get the job he signed
up for. They twisted him around into being a killing machine. And at the end of
it, he, what, rebelled against that? Yeah, finally. He was no longer suited
their purpose and then they got rid of him. Right. Jumping up to Mindbridge,
it's dedicated to your teachers at the Iowa Writers Workshop. Right. And the
style of the novel is unusual. Is there a connection with that? Oh, not really.
The connection is with John Dos Passos, actually. I read the USA trilogy some
years before I wrote Mindbridge and really was impressed by the way it worked
and thought it would work really well in science fiction. So I tried it out in a
rather long short story to Howard Hughes, A Modest Proposal. And it looked like
it would work, so I went ahead and applied it to Mindbridge. I did do most of
that book while I was studying at Iowa and that's why I did it. It's a case.
Yeah, you also used a lot of some humor to Howard Hughes' and Modest Proposal.
Do you find that a useful tool of getting across your message? Yeah, I think
sarcasm is the operative word. Yeah, I think even in a deadly serious book there
has to be some leavening of humor. A lot of science fiction is just too somber
and full of message. I think my primary function is to be an entertainer.
Humor is part of that. I also noticed in the dedication a lot of the authors at
the workshop were mainstream authors. Yeah. What was their reaction to science
fiction? Well, they were a little apprehensive about it. See, they didn't know I
was a science fiction writer when I joined the workshop. So I joined on the
basis of my first novel which was not science fiction. And it was some of them
were outwardly hostile towards science fiction such as Stanley Elkin. Others
were anywhere between apprehensive and slightly sympathetic. Stephen Becker one
of them had actually had a few pieces in the magazine Fantasy and Science
Fiction. In general though, they thinly disguised the attitude that this stuff
was just commercial fiction and therefore beneath contempt. But they couldn't
ignore the fact that I was making more money than most of them were with my
science fiction. And that might have been a cause of tension in some cases.
Yeah, that's a point that's kind of hard to argue with. Yeah. Yeah, that
attitude is one I've never really been able to understand because some of our
greatest novels are science fiction novels. Well, that's true. but the field is
judged by its worst not by its best. And people like that think of science
fiction they think in terms of great B movies and lousy television. They don't
they've never read much of the best of the field. It's a pity. back again to
Mindbridge. A specific question about it. The alien race that created the mind
bridge you suggest they commit racial suicide. Why do you think a supposedly
advanced race would do something like that? I don't know. I was feeling well
they've lived for millions or hundreds of millions or even billions of years
thoroughly individually immortal and there just wasn't anything else that they
hadn't done except die. But I just that's sort of a throwaway. I didn't put any
deep thought into why they should do that. I just wanted the image of the light
from their passing lighting up the nights of Earth while humans were just the
end of all. Yeah. They supernova this star. Yeah. The Cygnus loop is the remains
of their civilization. In tricentennial when the starship returns to Earth all
of the humans are gone. It never returns actually. It doesn't return. Okay. It's
a shifting viewpoint. Oh okay. What happened to the humans on the Earth? Some
sort of a war I assume. Okay. It doesn't say anything except that there's no
life left on Earth and it looks pretty much like an ecological zero. It's just
void.
And my other question about tricentennial is who were the beings in the glass
and metal tubes? Oh those are the leftovers the people who were on the L5 type
colony. They're still there. Their society is a closed cycle agriculture society
and there's no reason that they would have to die when the Earth died.
in various novels and stories that you've written you've created some excellent
aliens. How do you go about constructing your aliens? Not very logically. I've
been asked that before and it's a hard thing to answer. I know for instance the
LeVry in Mindbridge. I did have this notion of aliens who were shape changers
who appeared as angelically beautiful creatures but were ferocious killers.
Mindless killers. I wanted that image. Normally I don't know the the Sikang and
all my sons remembered. I just thought I'd make a big bug that had a Jewish
sense of humor. So that's all. I just everything else is decoration. You sort of
close your eyes and see this critter and type it down. I have on occasion looked
through books of animal anatomy and just glanced through biology and botany
textbooks to try to be inspired by natural forms. But I don't have any algorithm
that I know works for making monsters. In Mindbridge and Forever War humanity
has greatly changed at the end of both of the books. Almost an evolutionary
difference. Do you believe that we will have radically different natures in the
future? I think it's quite possible. Even say within the span of a century, so
many of the things that determine human nature are things that can be mitigated
by technology. such as the problem of dying so soon. That is, it's possible that
we'll in a couple of generations be able to live a century, two centuries, maybe
a thousand years, maybe as long as we care to. That'll radically change human
nature because it will take the pressure off of individuals.
There are other less so sanguine notions. It's possible that the sciences of
communication will grow into a kind of sophisticated mind control where it will
be difficult for the individual to know exactly what is his idea and what has
been induced by his own society. Sort of a sophisticated lifelong brainwashing.
It doesn't seem too unlikely. You can argue that it's happening now. Similar to
what Kornbluth and Pohl did in Space Merchants. Right. Space Merchants is a
chillingly prophetic novel, actually.
They do a lot of things with their heads. Those of us who stay away from the TV
screen aren't as affected by others, but it is there. the novels and short
stories that you've written, which one did you enjoy writing the most? Let me
see. Strangely enough,
I think I enjoyed most writing a pseudonymous adventure novel called Antar's
Revenge because it was so easy. Most of my writing was very difficult to do. And
this was just setting a spy up and letting him knock the bad guys down and win
in the end. It was all very pleasant. In terms of more serious work, I think
Mindbridge was the most fun to write. I had the most latitude there. I also
enjoyed that the most until this latest one. Yeah, I read Antar the Merman. Oh,
God, I guess it was a couple of years back. When did you write that? Oh, I guess
about 71. But that appeared to be the beginning of a series. Yes, that's right.
The idea was I was going to write three or four, and then somebody else was
going to pick it up. That's why it's not under my name. It's what they call a
house name. And I got tired of the damn thing after two. I did write a third one
and got paid for it, but it's pretty lousy and they didn't print it. And then
the whole series just fizzled away. I guess they were working on a contemporary
enthusiasm over dolphins, and when that started evaporating, they put the kibosh
on the series. or maybe they couldn't find anybody to continue it. Yeah, I would
imagine writing a series book like that would be difficult. Well, the first
one's easy. And in the case of Hattar, the second one was pretty easy, too. But
I've also done two Star Trek novels, which are sort of series things. It gets
old real fast. you can't make up things. You have to be consistent with the
canon that you've already established. And that can get real boring after about
100,000 orders. Tiresome. Yeah, and the Star Trek material that you've written,
the framework is already built, and you have to build a story around the
framework. Yeah, it's already established. That was sort of cute, though.
Writing the first one, I had fun, because I'd been in service during most of
Star Trek, and so I had to treat it as a research project, and I went and saw
the TV show every afternoon, and then I read all the books and made charts and
things like that, and sat down and wrote the books. That was an odd thing. I had
to sign a two-bub contract, whereas I found the first one very interesting and
fun to write. The second one was quite difficult to write. And the first one
took three months, and the second took nine. How did you get approached to write
those? Well, it was just being in the right place at the right time. In a way,
Jim Blish was doing a series of these things, and I knew they were quite
financially successful. And when Jim died, I was in correspondence with Fred
Pohl, who was his editor there. and I just, you know, apologized for being like
a vulture circling over the corpse, but I asked whether anybody was picking up
Jim's work, and he said, why don't you give it a try? And actually, well, Jim
was taking the scripts from the TV show and just turning them into short
stories, whereas he wanted me to do what Jim would have done if he had lived,
which was write original novels around the Star Trek characters. One of them,
the novels, was Planet of Judgment. Let's see, I read one of them, and that was
one I had to do where they discovered, I guess, what would be sort of considered
a Dyson sphere. Yeah. Is that Planet of Judgment, or is that the other one?
World Without End. I like doing the technical part of that. It's not a Dyson
sphere. Well, it is a hollowed-out asteroid. Bernal sphere is the one. proper
name for it. But I tried to work out this alien science. I've got a notebook
full of stuff about how flying aliens would build their cities and this and
that. That part was fun enough. I had to amuse myself sometimes. As to your
writing itself, how do you go about constructing your novels? do you come up
with an idea for the novel or characters and then work them into a particular
setting or what? Well, the most consistent pattern I have is working out the
actual structure, the way time is handled in the novel. It sounds rather dry,
but I don't like to outline the story in any detail because then there are no
surprises. So I start out with the structure, how the viewpoint is handled and
so forth. Start working and modify the structure as the story builds. usually I
have some vague idea of how it's going to end that becomes less vague as the
novel progresses. In short stories I normally start with a character who seems
interesting and make him do something. In other words, you set up sort of a
lettuce work and then you let the story build itself on that. Yeah. That seems
to work better for me. Although often the structure does have to be modified
halfway through. I don't want to be fit into a procrastinate bed by it. What is
Worlds about? It's the first part of a trilogy.
Yeah. Well, it starts out about a century from now. And it's essentially the
story of a woman who grew up, was born and grew up on a space colony, a space
settlement. It is sent to Earth for a year of postgraduate work, or finishing,
if you want to call it that, being set up for a political position as a liaison
between this world and Earth. And various strange things happen to her in the
year that she's here. It's sort of a old kind of a novel. She grows by being
sort of bounced around by Earth. And the second novel, Stars, takes over where
the first one ends and takes her into old age. Will all three novels be
following this one character? No, she dies in the second one. I think. I haven't
finished the second one. that's an interesting way of writing. You discover it
as you write it. Yeah, it's best for me.
watch for Joe Haldeman's new novel, Worlds, the first part of a trilogy, coming
in March from Viking Press.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson. This has been the Science
Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association, in conjunction with KOCV-FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.